Karma(Action) is not the cause of sufferings but attachments are

Leave the doer-ship of actions
Love what you do, do it from heart
Leave the attachment of every actions

Change your perceptions

Perceive everyone & everything as yourself
Perceive equanimity in happiness & sorrows, profit & loss

Mind your mind

When your mind is controlled, you are your best friend or else you are alone your enemy
Think from soul, not from mind
(Sensory organs are powerful than body, mind is powerful than senses, intellect is powerful than mind, Soul is powerful than intellect)


One can be Monk & Yogi being without renouncing the world & actions

One who renounces the attachments of every action, who sees oneself on every living being, who does his duties is considered as Yogi or Sanyasi(Monk)
"Knowledge is better than practice without discernment, meditation on God is superior to knowledge, and renunciation of the fruit of actions is even superior to meditation; for, peace immediately follows from renunciation."
One who is renounced the world, forces the senses to shutdown, and thinking about sensory pleasure in mind is considered as A fake human (Or fake Monk & Yogi).

Nature has three qualities

Sattva - selflessness, active
Who is active on doing action for upliftment of society without any personal benefit, holds this quality.


Rajas - selfishness, active
Who is active on pursuit of happiness of oneself, holds this quality.


Tamas - laziness, sleepiness
Who is lazy and inactive, just living for pleasure of eating and sleeping holds this quality.

One can change their nature(basic quality)

By reducing Rajas & Tamas, Sattva is uplifted
By reducing Sattva & Tamas, Rajas is uplifted
By reducing Sattva & Rajas, Tamas is uplifted
Nature of mind is restlessness but by regular practice one can have complete control over the mind.

God
God is formless, but all forms belongs to him
God is non-doer, but he is the one who create, sustains and destroy the universes & lives
God is wisdom as well as real self of every being
Krishna is personality of God, who born in the world to save Dharma
Sole God is being worshiped through varies ways

Wisdom is the only purifier of sins

Wisdom is the goal of life
Wisdom about the self has wisdom of everything

Surrender to The God

"He who deals equally with friend and foe, and is the same in honour and ignominy, who is alike in heat and cold, pleasure and pain and other contrary experiences, and is free from attachment, he who takes praise and reproach alike, and is given to contemplation and is contented with any means of subsistence available, entertaining no sense of ownership and attachment in respect of his dwelling-place and is full of devotion to Me, that person is dear to Me."
"He who, offering the highest love to Me, preaches the most profound gospel of the Gita among My devotees, shall come to Me alone; there is no doubt about it."
"Resigning all your duties to Me, the all-powerful and all supporting Lord, take refuge in Me alone; I shall absolve you of all sins, worry not".
"Give your mind to Me, be devoted to Me, worship Me and bow to Me. Doing so, you will come to Me alone, I truly promise you; for, you are exceptionally dear to Me."

The blind King Dhritarashtra asks Sanjaya to recount to him what happened when his family the Kauravas gathered to fight the Pandavas for control of Hastinapura. His family isn't the rightful heir to the kingdom, but they have assumed control, and Dhritarashtra is trying to preserve it for his son Duryodhana. Sanjaya tells of Arjuna, who has come as leader of the Pandavas to take back his kingdom, with Sri Krishna as his charioteer. The Gita is the conversation between Krishna and Arjuna leading up to the battle.

Arjuna doesn't want to fight. He doesn't understand why he has to shed his family's blood for a kingdom that he doesn't even necessarily want. In his eyes, killing his evil and killing his family is the greatest sin of all. He casts down his weapons and tells Krishna he will not fight. Krishna, then, begins the systematic process of explaining why it is Arjuna's dharmic duty to fight and how he must fight in order to restore his karma.

Krishna first explains the samsaric cycle of birth and death. He says there is no true death of the soul -- simply a sloughing of the body at the end of each round of birth and death. The purpose of this cycle is to allow a person to work off their karma, accumulated through lifetimes of action. If a person completes action selflessly, in service to God, then they can work off their karma, eventually leading to a dissolution of the soul, the achievement of enlightenment and vijnana, and an end to the samsaric cycle. If they act selfishly, then they keep accumulating debt, putting them further and further into karmic debt.

Krishna presents three main concepts for achieving this dissolution of the soul -- renunciation, selfless service, and meditation. All three are elements for achieving 'yoga,' or skill in action. Krishna says that the truly divine human does not renounce all worldly possessions or simply give up action, but rather finds peace in completing action in the highest service to God. As a result, a person must avoid the respective traps of the three gunas: rajas (anger, ego), tamas (ignorance, darkness), and saatva (harmony, purity).

The highest form of meditation comes when a person not only can free themselves from selfish action, but also focus entirely on the divine in their actions. In other words, Krishna says that he who achieves divine union with him in meditation will ultimately find freedom from the endless cycle of rebirth and death. He who truly finds union with God will find him even at the moment of death.

Arjuna stills seem to need evidence of Krishna's divine powers, so Arjuna appears to him in his powerful, most divine form, with the "power of one thousand suns." Seeing Krishna in his divine state, Arjuna suddenly realizes what enlightenment can bring him in union, and he now completely has faith in the yogic path. He goes on to ask Krishna how he can receive the love of God, and Krishna reveals that love comes from a person's selfless devotion to the divine, in addition to an understanding that the body is simply ephemeral -- a product of prakriti, emerging from purusha, and is subject to endless rebirth. A person must let go of their body's cravings and temptations and aversions to find freedom.

The Gita ends with Krishna telling Arjuna he must choose the path of good or evil, as it his his duty to fight the Kauravas for his kingdom. In that, he is correcting the balance of good and evil, fulfilling his dharma, and offering the deepest form of selfless service. Arjuna understands and, with that, proceeds into battle.
Whatever happened, has happened well.

Whatever is happening is happening well

Whatever will happen, will happen well.

What did you lose, that you are grieving for?

What did you create, for it to go waste?

Whatever you took, you took it from here (the Universe)

Whatever you gave, you gave it back here (the Universe)

Whatever is yours today, is another one’s tomorrow. The next day, it becomes some one else’s..

This change, is the law of the Universe, and the summary of creation.