Chapter Eight The Story of Pingala
1. The saintly brahmana said: O King, the embodied living entity automatically experiences unhappiness in
heaven or hell. Similarly, happiness will also be experienced, even without one’s seeking it. Therefore a
person of intelligent discrimination does not make any endeavor to obtain such material happiness.
2. Following the example of the python, one should give up material endeavors and accept for one’s
maintenance food that comes of its own accord, whether such food be delicious or tasteless, ample or
meager.
3. If at any time food does not come, then a saintly person should fast for many days without making
endeavor. He should understand that by God’s arrangement he must fast. Thus, following the example of the
python, he should remain peaceful and patient.
4. A saintly person should remain peaceful and materially inactive, maintaining his body without much
endeavor. Even though possessed of full sensual, mental and physical strength, a saintly person should not
become active for material gain but rather should always remain alert to his actual self-interest.
5. A saintly sage is happy and pleasing in his external behavior, whereas internally he is most grave and
thoughtful. Because his knowledge is immeasurable and unlimited he is never disturbed, and thus in all
respects he is like the tranquil waters of the unfathomable and unsurpassable ocean.
6. During the rainy season the swollen rivers rush into the ocean, and during the dry summer the rivers, now
shallow, severely reduce their supply of water; yet the ocean does not swell up during the rainy season, nor
does it dry up in the hot summer. In the same way, a saintly devotee who has accepted the Supreme
Personality of Godhead as the goal of his life sometimes will receive by providence great material opulence,
and sometimes he will find himself materially destitute. However, such a devotee of the Lord does not
rejoice in a flourishing condition, nor is he morose when poverty-stricken.
7. One who has failed to control his senses immediately feels attraction upon seeing a woman’s form, which
is created by the illusory energy of the Supreme Lord. Indeed, when the woman speaks with enticing words,
smiles coquettishly and moves her body sensuously, his mind is immediately captured, and thus he falls
blindly into the darkness of material existence, just as the moth maddened by the fire rushes blindly into its
flames.
8. A foolish person with no intelligent discrimination is immediately aroused at the sight of a lusty woman
beautifully decorated with golden ornaments, fine clothing and other cosmetic features. Being eager for
sense gratification, such a fool loses all intelligence and is destroyed just like the moth who rushes into the
blazing fire.
9. A saintly person should accept only enough food to keep his body and soul together. He should go from
door to door accepting just a little bit of food from each family. Thus he should practice the occupation of
the honeybee.
10. Just as the honeybee takes nectar from all flowers, big and small, an intelligent human being should take
the essence from all religious scriptures.
11. A saintly person should not think, “This food I will keep to eat tonight and this other food I can save for
tomorrow.” In other words, a saintly person should not store foodstuffs acquired by begging. Rather, he
should use his own hands as his plate and eat whatever fits on them. His only storage container should be his
belly, and whatever conveniently fits into his belly should be his stock of food. Thus one should not imitate
the greedy honeybee who eagerly collects more and more honey.
12. A saintly mendicant should not even collect foodstuffs to eat later in the same day or the next day. If he
disregards this injunction and like the honeybee collects more and more delicious foodstuffs, that which he
has collected will indeed ruin him.
13. A saintly person should never touch a young girl. In fact, he should not even let his foot touch a wooden
doll in the shape of a woman. By bodily contact with a woman he will surely b
14. A man possessing intelligent discrimination should not under any circumstances try to exploit the
beautiful form of a woman for his sense gratification. Just as an elephant trying to enjoy a she-elephant is
killed by other bull elephants also enjoying her company, one trying to enjoy a lady’s company can at any
moment be killed by her other lovers who are stronger than he.
15. A greedy person accumulates a large quantity of money with great struggle and pain, but the person who
has struggled so much to acquire this wealth is not always allowed to enjoy it himself or give it in charity to
others. The greedy man is like the bee who struggles to produce a large quantity of honey, which is then
stolen by a man who will enjoy it personally or sell it to others. No matter how carefully one hides his hardearned wealth or tries to protect it, there are those who are expert in detecting the whereabouts of valuable
things, and they will steal it.
16. Just as a hunter takes away the honey laboriously produced by the honeybees, similarly, saintly
mendicants such as brahmacaris and sannyasis are entitled to enjoy the property painstakingly accumulated
by householders dedicated to family enjoyment.
17. A saintly person dwelling in the forest in the renounced order of life should never listen to songs or
music promoting material enjoyment. Rather, a saintly person should carefully study the example of the
deer, who is bewildered by the sweet music of the hunter’s horn and is thus captured and killed.
18. Becoming attracted to the worldly singing, dancing and musical entertainment of beautiful women, even
the great sage Rsyasrnga, the son of Mrgi, fell totally under their control, just like a pet animal.
19. Just as a fish, incited by the desire to enjoy his tongue, is fatally trapped on the fisherman’s hook,
similarly, a foolish person is bewildered by the extremely disturbing urges of the tongue and thus is ruined.
20. By fasting, learned men quickly bring all of the senses except the tongue under control, because by
abstaining from eating such men are afflicted with an increased desire to gratify the sense of taste.
21. Although one may conquer all of the other senses, as long as the tongue is not conquered it cannot be
said that one has controlled his senses. However, if one is able to control the tongue, then one is understood
to be in full control of all the senses.
22. O son of kings, previously in the city of Videha there dwelled a prostitute named Pingala. Now please
hear what I have learned from that lady.
23. Once that prostitute, desiring to bring a lover into her house, stood outside in the doorway at night
showing her beautiful form.
24. O best among men, this prostitute was very anxious to get money, and as she stood on the street at night
she studied all the men who were passing by, thinking, “Oh, this one surely has money. I know he can pay
the price, and I am sure he would enjoy my company very much.” Thus she thought about all the men on the
street.
25-26. As the prostitute Pingala stood in the doorway, many men came and went, walking by her house. Her
only means of sustenance was prostitution, and therefore she anxiously thought, “Maybe this one who is
coming now is very rich...Oh, he is not stopping, but I am sure someone else will come. Surely this man
who is coming now will want to pay me for my love, and he will probably give lots of money.” Thus, with
vain hope, she remained leaning against the doorway, unable to finish her business and go to sleep. Out of
anxiety she would sometimes walk out toward the street, and sometimes she went back into her house. In
this way, the midnight hour gradually arrived.
27. As the night wore on, the prostitute, who intensely desired money, gradually became morose, and her
face dried up. Thus being filled with anxiety for money and most disappointed, she began to feel a great
detachment from her situation, and happiness arose in her mind.
28. The prostitute felt disgusted with her material situation and thus became indifferent to it. Indeed,
detachment acts like a sword, cutting to pieces the binding network of material hopes and desires. Now
please hear from me the song sung by the prostitute in that situation.
29. O King, just as a human being who is bereft of spiritual knowledge never desires to give up his false
sense of proprietorship over many material things, similarly, a person who has not developed detachment
never desires to give up the bondage of the material body.
30. The prostitute Pingala said: Just see how greatly illusioned I am ! Because I cannot control my mind,
just like a fool I desire lusty pleasure from an insignificant man.
31. I am such a fool that I have given up the service of that person who, being eternally situated within my
heart, is actually most dear to me. That most dear one is the Lord of the universe, who is the bestower of real
love and happiness and the source of all prosperity. Although He is in my own heart, I have completely
neglected Him. Instead I have ignorantly served insignificant men who can never satisfy my real desires and
who have simply brought me unhappiness, fear, anxiety, lamentation and illusion.
32. Oh, how I have uselessly tortured my own soul! I have sold my body to lusty, greedy men who are
themselves objects of pity. Thus practicing the most abominable profession of a prostitute, I hoped to get
money and sex pleasure.
33. This material body is like a house in which I, the soul, am living. The bones forming my spine, ribs,
arms and legs are like the beams, crossbeams and pillars of the house, and the whole structure, which is full
of stool and urine, is covered by skin, hair and nails. The nine doors leading into this body are constantly
excreting foul substances. Besides me, what woman could be so foolish as to devote herself to this material
body, thinking that she might find pleasure and love in this contraption?
34. Certainly in this city of Videha I alone am completely foolish. I neglected the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who awards us everything, even our original spiritual form, and instead I desired to enjoy sense
gratification with many men.
35. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is absolutely the most dear one for all living beings because He is
everyone’s well-wisher and Lord. He is the Supreme Soul situated in everyone’s heart. Therefore I will now
pay the price of complete surrender, and thus purchasing the Lord I will enjoy with Him just like
Laksmidevi.
36. Men provide sense gratification for women, but all these men, and even the demigods in heaven, have a
beginning and an end. They are all temporary creations who will be dragged away by time. Therefore how
much actual pleasure or happiness could any of them ever give to their wives?
37. Although I most stubbornly hoped to enjoy the material world, somehow or other detachment has arisen
in my heart, and it is making me very happy. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, must
be pleased with me. Without even knowing it, I must have performed some activity satisfying to Him.
38. A person who has developed detachment can give up the bondage of material society, friendship and
love, and a person who undergoes great suffering gradually becomes, out of hopelessness, detached and
indifferent to the material world. Thus, due to my great suffering, such detachment awoke in my heart; yet
how could I have undergone such merciful suffering if I were actually unfortunate? Therefore, I am in fact
fortunate and have received the mercy of the Lord. He must somehow or other be pleased with me.
39. With devotion I accept the great benefit that the Lord has bestowed upon me. Having given up my sinful
desires for ordinary sense gratification, I now take shelter of Him, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
40. I am now completely satisfied, and I have full faith in the Lord’s mercy. Therefore I will maintain
myself with whatever comes of its own accord. I shall enjoy life with only the Lord, because He is the real
source of love and happiness.
41. The intelligence of the living entity is stolen away by activities of sense gratification, and thus he falls
into the dark well of material existence. Within that well he is then seized by the deadly serpent of time.
Who else but the Supreme Personality of Godhead could save the poor living entity from such a hopeless
condition?
42. When the living entity sees that the entire universe has been seized by the serpent of time, he becomes
sober and sane and at that time detaches himself from all material sense gratification. In that condition the
living entity is qualified to be his own protector.
43. The avadhuta said: Thus, her mind completely made up, Pingala cut off all her sinful desires to enjoy
sex pleasure with lovers, and she became situated in perfect peace. Then she sat down on her bed.
44. Material desire is undoubtedly the cause of the greatest unhappiness, and freedom from such desire is
the cause of the greatest happiness. Therefore, completely cutting off her desire to enjoy so-called lovers,
Pingala very happily went to sleep.
Chapter Nine Detachment from All that Is Material
1. The saintly brahmana said: Everyone considers certain things within the material world to be most dear to
him, and because of attachment to such things one eventually becomes miserable. One who understands this
gives up material possessiveness and attachment and thus achieves unlimited happiness.
2. Once a group of large hawks who were unable to find any prey attacked another, weaker hawk who was
holding some meat. At that time, being in danger of his life, the hawk gave up his meat and experienced
actual happiness.
3. In family life, the parents are always in anxiety about their home, children and reputation. But I have
nothing to do with these things. I do not worry at all about any family, and I do not care about honor and
dishonor. I enjoy only the life of the soul, and I find love on the spiritual platform. Thus I wander the earth
like a child.
4. In this world two types of people are free from all anxiety and merged in great happiness: one who is a
retarded and childish fool and one who has approached the Supreme Lord, who is beyond the three modes
of material nature.
5. Once a marriageable young girl was alone in her house because her parents and relatives had gone that
day to another place. At that time a few men arrived at the house, specifically desiring to marry her. She
received them with all hospitality.
6. The girl went to a private place and began to make preparations so that the unexpected male guests could
eat. As she was beating the rice, the conchshell bracelets on her arms were colliding and making a loud
noise.
7. The young girl feared that the men would consider her family to be poor because their daughter was
busily engaged in the menial task of husking rice. Being very intelligent, the shy girl broke the shell
bracelets from her arms, leaving just two on each wrist.
8. Thereafter, as the young girl continued to husk the rice, the two bracelets on each wrist continued to
collide and make noise. Therefore she took one bracelet off each arm, and with only one left on each wrist
there was no more noise.
9. O subduer of the enemy, I travel throughout the surface of the earth learning constantly about the nature
of this world, and thus I personally witnessed the lesson of the young girl.
10. When many people live together in one place there will undoubtedly be quarreling. And even if only two
people live together there will be frivolous conversation and disagreement. Therefore, to avoid conflict, one
should live alone, as we learn from the example of the bracelet of the young girl.
11. Having perfected the yoga sitting postures and conquered the breathing process, one should make the
mind steady by detachment and the regulated practice of yoga. Thus one should carefully fix the mind on
the single goal of yoga practice.
12. The mind can be controlled when it is fixed on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Having achieved a
stable situation, the mind becomes free from polluted desires to execute material activities; thus as the mode
of goodness increases in strength, one can completely give up the modes of passion and ignorance, and
gradually one transcends even the material mode of goodness. When the mind is freed from the fuel of the
modes of nature, the fire of material existence is extinguished. Then one achieves the transcendental
platform of direct relationship with the object of his meditation, the Supreme Lord.
13. Thus, when one’s consciousness is completely fixed on the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, one no longer sees duality, or internal and external reality. The example is given of the arrow
maker who was so absorbed in making a straight arrow that he did not even see or notice the king himself,
who was passing right next to him.
14. A saintly person should remain alone and constantly travel without any fixed residence. Being alert, he
should remain secluded and should act in such a way that he is not recognized or noticed by others. Moving
without companions, he should not speak more than required.
15. When a person living in a temporary material body tries to construct a happy home, the result is fruitless
and miserable. The snake, however, enters a home that has been built by others and prospers happily.
16. The Lord of the universe, Narayana, is the worshipable God of all living entities. Without extraneous
assistance, the Lord creates this universe by His own potency, and at the time of annihilation the Lord
destroys the universe through His personal expansion of time and withdraws all of the cosmos, including all
the conditioned living entities, within Himself. Thus, His unlimited Self is the shelter and reservoir of all
potencies. The subtle pradhana, the basis of all cosmic manifestation, is conserved within the Lord and is in
this way not different from Him. In the aftermath of annihilation the Lord stands alone.
17-18. When the Supreme Personality of Godhead displays His own potency in the form of time and guides
His material potencies, such as the mode of goodness, into a neutral condition of equilibrium, He remains as
the supreme controller of that neutral state, called pradhana, as well as of the living entities. He is also the
supreme worshipable object for all beings, including liberated souls, demigods and ordinary conditioned
souls. The Lord is eternally free from any material designation, and He constitutes the totality of spiritual
bliss, which one experiences by seeing the Lord’s spiritual form. The Lord thus exhibits the fullest meaning
of the word “liberation.”
19. O subduer of the enemies, at the time of creation the Personality of Godhead expands His own
transcendental potency in the form of time, and agitating His material energy, maya, composed of the three
modes of material nature, He creates the mahat-tattva.
20. According to great sages, that which is the basis of the three modes of material nature and which
manifests the variegated universe is called the sutra or mahat-tattva. Indeed, this universe is resting within
that mahat-tattva, and due to its potency the living entity undergoes material existence.
21. Just as from within himself the spider expands thread through his mouth, plays with it for some time and
eventually swallows it, similarly, the Supreme Personality of Godhead expands His personal potency from
within Himself. Thus, the Lord displays the network of cosmic manifestation, utilizes it according to His
purpose and eventually withdraws it completely within Himself.
22. If out of love, hate or fear an embodied soul fixes his mind with intelligence and complete concentration
upon a particular bodily form, he will certainly attain the form that he is meditating upon.
23. O King, once a wasp forced a weaker insect to enter his hive and kept him trapped there. In great fear
the weak insect constantly meditated upon his captor, and without giving up his body, he gradually achieved
the same state of existence as the wasp. Thus one achieves a state of existence according to one’s constant
concentration.
24. O King, from all these spiritual masters I have acquired great wisdom. Now please listen as I explain
what I learned from my own body.
25. The material body is also my spiritual master because it teaches me detachment. Being subject to
creation and destruction, it always comes to a painful end. Thus, although using my body to acquire
knowledge, I always remember that it will ultimately be consumed by others, and remaining detached, I
move about this world.
26. A man attached to the body accumulates money with great struggle to expand and protect the position of
his wife, children, property, domestic animals, servants, homes, relatives, friends, and so on. He does all this
for the gratification of his own body. As a tree before dying produces the seed of a future tree, the dying
body manifests the seed of one’s next material body in the form of one’s accumulated karma. Thus assuring
the continuation of material existence, the material body sinks down and dies.
27. A man who has many wives is constantly harassed by them. He is responsible for their maintenance, and
thus all the ladies constantly pull him in different directions, each struggling for her self-interest. Similarly,
the material senses harass the conditioned soul, pulling him in many different directions at once. On one
side the tongue is pulling him to arrange tasty food; then thirst drags him to get a suitable drink.
Simultaneously the sex organs clamor for satisfaction, and the sense of touch demands soft, sensuous
objects. The belly harasses him until it is filled, the ears demand to hear pleasing sounds, the sense of smell
hankers for pleasant aromas, and the fickle eyes clamor for pleasing sights. Thus the senses, organs and
limbs, all desiring satisfaction, pull the living entity in many directions.
28. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, expanding His own potency, maya-sakti, created innumerable
species of life to house the conditioned souls. Yet by creating the forms of trees, reptiles, animals, birds,
snakes and so on, the Lord was not satisfied within His heart. Then He created human life, which offers the
conditioned soul sufficient intelligence to perceive the Absolute Truth, and became pleased.
29. After many, many births and deaths one achieves the rare human form of life, which, although
temporary, affords one the opportunity to attain the highest perfection. Thus a sober human being should
quickly endeavor for the ultimate perfection of life as long as his body, which is always subject to death, has
not fallen down and died. After all, sense gratification is available even in the most abominable species of
life, whereas Krsna consciousness is possible only for a human being.
30. Having learned from my spiritual masters, I remain situated in realization of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and, fully renounced and enlightened by realized spiritual knowledge, wander the earth without
attachment or false ego.
31. Although the Absolute Truth is one without a second, the sages have described Him in many different
ways. Therefore one may not be able to acquire very firm or complete knowledge from one spiritual master.
32. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Having thus spoken to King Yadu, the wise brahmana
accepted obeisances and worship from the King and felt pleased within himself. Then bidding farewell, he
left exactly as he had come.
33. O Uddhava, hearing the words of the avadhuta, the saintly King Yadu, who is the forefather of our own
ancestors, became free from all material attachment, and thus his mind was evenly fixed on the spiritual
platform.
Chapter Ten The Nature of Fruitive Activity
1. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Taking full shelter in Me, with the mind carefully fixed in the
devotional service of the Lord as spoken by Me, one should live without personal desire and practice the
social and occupational system called varnasrama.
2. A purified soul should see that because the conditioned souls who are dedicated to sense gratification
have falsely accepted the objects of sense pleasure as truth, all of their endeavors are doomed to failure.
3. One who is sleeping may see many objects of sense gratification in a dream, but such pleasurable things
are merely creations of the mind and are thus ultimately useless. Similarly, the living entity who is asleep to
his spiritual identity also sees many sense objects, but these innumerable objects of temporary gratification
are creations of the Lord’s illusory potency and have no permanent existence. One who meditates upon
them, impelled by the senses, uselessly engages his intelligence.
4. One who has fixed Me within his mind as the goal of life should give up activities based on sense
gratification and should instead execute work governed by the regulative principles for advancement. When,
however, one is fully engaged in searching out the ultimate truth of the soul, one should not accept the
scriptural injunctions governing fruitive activities.
5. One who has accepted Me as the supreme goal of life should strictly observe the scriptural injunctions
forbidding sinful activities and, as far as possible, should execute the injunctions prescribing minor
regulative duties such as cleanliness. Ultimately, however, one should approach a bona fide spiritual master
who is full in knowledge of Me as I am, who is peaceful, and who by spiritual elevation is not different from
Me.
6. The servant or disciple of the spiritual master should be free from false prestige, never considering
himself to be the doer. He should be active and never lazy and should give up all sense of proprietorship
over the objects of the senses, including his wife, children, home and society. He should be endowed with
feelings of loving friendship toward the spiritual master and should never become deviated or bewildered.
The servant or disciple should always desire advancement in spiritual understanding, should not envy
anyone and should always avoid useless conversation.
7. One should see one’s real self-interest in life in all circumstances and should therefore remain detached
from wife, children, home, land, relatives, friends, wealth and so on.
8. Just as fire, which burns and illuminates, is different from firewood, which is to be burned to give
illumination, similarly the seer within the body, the self-enlightened spirit soul, is different from the material
body, which is to be illuminated by consciousness. Thus the spirit soul and the body possess different
characteristics and are separate entities.
9. Just as fire may appear differently as dormant, manifest, weak, brilliant and so on, according to the
condition of the fuel, similarly, the spirit soul enters a material body and accepts particular bodily
characteristics.
10. The subtle and gross material bodies are created by the material modes of nature, which expand from the
potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Material existence occurs when the living entity falsely
accepts the qualities of the gross and subtle bodies as being his own factual nature. This illusory state,
however, can be destroyed by real knowledge.
11. Therefore, by the cultivation of knowledge one should approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead
situated within oneself. By understanding the Lord’s pure, transcendental existence, one should gradually
give up the false vision of the material world as independent reality.
12. The spiritual master can be compared to the lower kindling stick, the disciple to the upper kindling stick,
and the instruction given by the guru to the third stick placed in between. The transcendental knowledge
communicated from guru to disciple is compared to the fire arising from the contact of these, which burns
the darkness of ignorance to ashes, bringing great happiness both to guru and disciple.
13. By submissively hearing from an expert spiritual master, the expert disciple develops pure knowledge,
which repels the onslaught of material illusion arising from the three modes of material nature. Finally this
pure knowledge itself ceases, just as fire ceases when the stock of fuel has been consumed.
14-16. My dear Uddhava, I have thus explained to you perfect knowledge. There are philosophers, however,
who challenge My conclusion. They state that the natural position of the living entity is to engage in fruitive
activities, and they see him as the enjoyer of the happiness and unhappiness that accrue from his own work.
According to this materialistic philosophy, the world, time, the revealed scriptures and the self are all
variegated and eternal, existing as a perpetual flow of transformations. Knowledge, moreover, cannot be one
or eternal, because it arises from the different and changing forms of objects; thus knowledge itself is always
subject to change. Even if you accept such a philosophy, My dear Uddhava, there will still be perpetual
birth, death, old age and disease, since all living entities must accept a material body subject to the influence
of time.
17. Although the performer of fruitive activities desires perpetual happiness, it is clearly observed that
materialistic workers are often unhappy and only occasionally satisfied, thus proving that they are not
independent or in control of their destiny. When a person is always under the superior control of another,
how can he expect any valuable results from his own fruitive actions?
18. It is observed within the material world that sometimes even an intelligent person is not happy.
Similarly, sometimes even a great fool is happy. The concept of becoming happy through expertly
performing material activities is simply a useless exhibition of false egotism.
19. Even if people know how to achieve happiness and avoid unhappiness, they still do not know the
process by which death will not be able to exert its power over them.
20. Death is not at all pleasing, and since everyone is exactly like a condemned man being led to the place of
execution, what possible happiness can people derive from material objects or the gratification they
provide?
21. That material happiness of which we hear, such as promotion to heavenly planets for celestial
enjoyment, is just like that material happiness we have already experienced. Both are polluted by jealousy,
envy, decay and death. Therefore, just as an attempt to raise crops becomes fruitless if there are many
problems like crop disease, insect plague or drought, similarly, the attempt to attain material happiness,
either on earth or on the heavenly planets, is always fruitless because of innumerable obstacles.
22. If one performs Vedic sacrifices and fruitive rituals without any mistake or contamination, one will
achieve a heavenly situation in the next life. But even this result, which is only achieved by perfect
performance of fruitive rituals, will be vanquished by time. Now hear of this.
23. If on earth one performs sacrifices for the satisfaction of the demigods, he goes to the heavenly planets,
where, just like a demigod, he enjoys all of the heavenly pleasures he has earned by his performances.
24. Having achieved the heavenly planets, the performer of ritualistic sacrifices travels in a glowing
airplane, which he obtains as the result of his piety on earth. Being glorified by songs sung by the
Gandharvas and dressed in wonderfully charming clothes, he enjoys life surrounded by heavenly goddesses.
25. Accompanied by heavenly women, the enjoyer of the fruits of sacrifice goes on pleasure rides in a
wonderful airplane, which is decorated with circles of tinkling bells and which flies wherever he desires.
Being relaxed, comfortable and happy in the heavenly pleasure gardens, he does not consider that he is
exhausting the fruits of his piety and will soon fall down to the mortal world.
26. Until his pious results are used up, the performer of sacrifice enjoys life in the heavenly planets. When
the pious results are exhausted, however, he falls down from the pleasure gardens of heaven, being moved
against his desire by the force of eternal time.
27-29. If a human being is engaged in sinful, irreligious activities, either because of bad association or
because of his failure to control his senses, then such a person will certainly develop a personality full of
material desires. He thus becomes miserly toward others, greedy and always anxious to exploit the bodies of
women. When the mind is so polluted one becomes violent and aggressive and without the authority of
Vedic injunctions slaughters innocent animals for sense gratification. Worshiping ghosts and spirits, the
bewildered person falls fully into the grip of unauthorized activities and thus goes to hell, where he receives
a material body infected by the darkest modes of nature. In such a degraded body, he unfortunately
continues to perform inauspicious activities that greatly increase his future unhappiness, and therefore he
again accepts a similar material body. What possible happiness can there be for one who engages in
activities inevitably terminating in death?
30. In all the planetary systems, from the heavenly to the hellish, and for all of the great demigods who live
for one thousand yuga cycles, there is fear of Me in My form of time. Even Brahma, who possesses the
supreme life span of 311,040,000,000,000 years, is also afraid of Me.
31. The material senses create material activities, either pious or sinful, and the modes of nature set the
material senses into motion. The living entity, being fully engaged by the material senses and modes of
nature, experiences the various results of fruitive work.
32. As long as the living entity thinks that the modes of material nature have separate existences, he will be
obliged to take birth in many different forms and will experience varieties of material existence. Therefore,
the living entity remains completely dependent on fruitive activities under the modes of nature.
33. The conditioned soul who remains dependent on fruitive activities under the material modes of nature
will continue to fear Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, since I impose the results of one’s fruitive
activities. Those who accept the material concept of life, taking the variegatedness of the modes of nature to
be factual, devote themselves to material enjoyment and are therefore always absorbed in lamentation and
grief 34. When there is agitation and interaction of the material modes of nature, the living entities then describe
Me in various ways such as all-powerful time, the Self, Vedic knowledge, the universe, one’s own nature,
religious ceremonies and so on.
35. Sri Uddhava said: O my Lord, a living entity situated within the material body is surrounded by the
modes of nature and the happiness and distress that are born of activities caused by these modes. How is it
possible that he is not bound by this material encirclement? It may also be said that the living entity is
ultimately transcendental and has nothing to do with the material world. Then how is he ever bound by
material nature?
36-37. O my Lord, Acyuta (Indestructible), the same living entity is sometimes described as eternally conditioned and at
other times as eternally liberated. I am not able to understand, therefore, the actual situation of the living
entity. You, my Lord, are the best of those who are expert in answering philosophical questions. Please
explain to me the symptoms by which one can tell the difference between a living entity who is eternally
liberated and one who is eternally conditioned. In what various ways would they remain situated, enjoy life,
eat, evacuate, lie down, sit or move about?