Chapter Eleven The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
1. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, due to the influence of the material modes
of nature, which are under My control, the living entity is sometimes designated as conditioned and
sometimes as liberated. In fact, however, the soul is never really bound up or liberated, and since I am the
supreme Lord of maya, which is the cause of the modes of nature, I also am never to be considered liberated
or in bondage.
2. Just as a dream is merely a creation of one’s intelligence but has no actual substance, similarly, material
lamentation, illusion, happiness, distress and the acceptance of the material body under the influence of
maya are all creations of My illusory energy. In other words, material existence has no essential reality.
3. O Uddhava, both knowledge and ignorance, being products of maya, are expansions of My potency. Both
knowledge and ignorance are beginningless and perpetually award liberation and bondage to embodied
living beings.
4. O most intelligent Uddhava, the living entity, called jiva, is part and parcel of Me, but due to ignorance he
has been suffering in material bondage since time immemorial. By knowledge, however, he can be
liberated.
5. Thus, My dear Uddhava, in the same material body we find opposing characteristics, such as great
happiness and misery. That is because both the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is eternally liberated,
as well as the conditioned soul are within the body. I shall now speak to you about their different
characteristics.
6. By chance, two birds have made a nest together in the same tree. The two birds are friends and are of a
similar nature. One of them, however, is eating the fruits of the tree, whereas the other, who does not eat the
fruits, is in a superior position due to His potency.
7. The bird who does not eat the fruits of the tree is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who by His
omniscience perfectly understands His own position and that of the conditioned living entity, represented by
the eating bird. That living entity, on the other hand, does not understand himself or the Lord. He is covered
by ignorance and is thus called eternally conditioned, whereas the Personality of Godhead, being full of
perfect knowledge, is eternally liberated.
8. One who is enlightened in self-realization, although living within the material body, sees himself as
transcendental to the body, just as one who has arisen from a dream gives up identification with the dream
body. A foolish person, however, although not identical with his material body but transcendental to it,
thinks himself to be situated in the body, just as one who is dreaming sees himself as situated in an
imaginary body.
9. An enlightened person who is free from the contamination of material desire does not consider himself to
be the performer of bodily activities; rather, he knows that in all such activities it is only the senses, born of
the modes of nature, that are contacting sense objects born of the same modes of nature.
10. An unintelligent person situated within the body created by his previous fruitive activities thinks, “I am
the performer of action.” Bewildered by false ego, such a foolish person is therefore bound up by fruitive
activities, which are in fact carried out by the modes of nature.
11. An enlightened person fixed in detachment engages his body in lying down, sitting, walking, bathing,
seeing, touching, smelling, eating, hearing and so on, but is never entangled by such activities. Indeed,
remaining as a witness to all bodily functions, he merely engages his bodily senses with their objects and
does not become entangled like an unintelligent person.
12-13. Although the sky, or space, is the resting place of everything, the sky does not mix with anything, nor
is it entangled. Similarly, the sun is not at all attached to the water in which it is reflected within
innumerable reservoirs, and the mighty wind blowing everywhere is not affected by the innumerable aromas
and atmospheres through which it passes. In the same way, a self-realized soul is completely detached from
the material body and the material world around it. He is like a person who has awakened and arisen from a
dream. With expert vision sharpened by detachment, the self-realized soul cuts all doubts to pieces through
knowledge of the self and completely withdraws his consciousness from the expansion of material variety.
14. A person is considered to be completely liberated from the gross and subtle material bodies when all the
functions of his vital energy, senses, mind and intelligence are performed without material desire. Such a
person, although situated within the body, is not entangled.
15. Sometimes for no apparent reason one’s body is attacked by cruel people or violent animals. At other
times and in other places, one will suddenly be offered great respect or worship. One who becomes neither
angry when attacked nor satisfied when worshiped is actually intelligent.
16. A saintly sage sees with equal vision and therefore is not affected by that which is materially good or
bad. Indeed, although he observes others performing good and bad work and speaking properly and
improperly, the sage does not praise or criticize anyone.
17. For the purpose of maintaining his body, a liberated sage should not act, speak or contemplate in terms
of material good or bad. Rather, he should be detached in all material circumstances, and taking pleasure in
self-realization, he should wander about engaged in this liberated life-style, appearing like a retarded person
to outsiders.
18. If through meticulous study one becomes expert in reading Vedic literature but makes no endeavor to fix
one’s mind on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then one’s endeavor is certainly like that of a man who
works very hard to take care of a cow that gives no milk. In other words, the fruit of one’s laborious study of
Vedic knowledge will simply be the labor itself. There will be no other tangible result.
19. My dear Uddhava, that man is certainly most miserable who takes care of a cow that gives no milk, an
unchaste wife, a body totally dependent on others, useless children or wealth not utilized for the right
purpose. Similarly, one who studies Vedic knowledge devoid of My glories is also most miserable.
20. My dear Uddhava, an intelligent person should never take to literatures that do not contain descriptions
of My activities, which purify the whole universe. Indeed, I create, maintain and annihilate the entire
material manifestation. Among all My pastime incarnations, the most beloved are Krsna and Balarama. Any
so-called knowledge that does not recognize these activities of Mine is simply barren and is not acceptable
to those who are actually intelligent.
21. Coming to this conclusion of all knowledge, one should give up the false conception of material variety
that one imposes upon the soul and thus cease one’s material existence. The mind should be fixed on Me,
since I am all-pervading.
22. My dear Uddhava, if you are not able to free your mind from all material disturbance and thus absorb it
completely on the spiritual platform, then perform all your activities as an offering to Me, without trying to
enjoy the fruits.
23-24. My dear Uddhava, narrations of My pastimes and qualities are all-auspicious and purify the entire
universe. A faithful person who constantly hears, glorifies and remembers such transcendental activities,
who through dramatic performances relives My pastimes, beginning with My appearance, and who takes
full shelter of Me, dedicating his religious, sensual and occupational activities for My satisfaction, certainly
obtains unflinching devotional service to Me, the eternal Personality of Godhead.
25. One who has obtained pure devotional service by association with My devotees always engages in
worshiping Me. Thus he very easily goes to My abode, which is revealed by My pure devotees.
26-27. Sri Uddhava said: My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, what type of person do You
consider to be a true devotee, and what type of devotional service is approved by great devotees as worthy
of being offered to Your Lordship? My dear ruler of the universal controllers, O Lord of Vaikuntha and
almighty God of the universe, I am Your devotee, and because I love You I have no other shelter than You.
Therefore please explain this to me.
28. My dear Lord, as the Absolute Truth You are transcendental to material nature, and like the sky You are
never entangled in any way. Still, being controlled by Your devotees’ love, You accept many different
forms, incarnating according to Your devotees’ desires.
29-32. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O Uddhava, a saintly person is merciful and never injures
others. Even if others are aggressive he is tolerant and forgiving toward all living entities. His strength and
meaning in life come from the truth itself, he is free from all envy and jealousy, and his mind is equal in
material happiness and distress. Thus, he dedicates his time to work for the welfare of all others. His
intelligence is never bewildered by material desires, and he has controlled his senses. His behavior is always
pleasing, never harsh and always exemplary, and he is free from possessiveness. He never endeavors in
ordinary, worldly activities, and he strictly controls his eating. He therefore always remains peaceful and
steady. A saintly person is thoughtful and accepts Me as his only shelter. Such a person is very cautious in
the execution of his duties and is never subject to superficial transformations, because he is steady and
noble, even in a distressing situation. He has conquered over the six material qualities—namely hunger,
thirst, lamentation, illusion, old age and death. He is free from all desire for prestige and offers honor to
others. He is expert in reviving the Krsna consciousness of others and therefore never cheats anyone. Rather,
he is a well-wishing friend to all, being most merciful. Such a saintly person must be considered the most
learned of men. He perfectly understands that the ordinary religious duties prescribed by Me in various
Vedic scriptures possess favorable qualities that purify the performer, and he knows that neglect of such
duties constitutes a discrepancy in one’s life. Having taken complete shelter at My lotus feet, however, a
saintly person ultimately renounces such ordinary religious duties and worships Me alone. He is thus
considered to be the best among all living entities.
33. My devotees may or may not know exactly what I am, who I am and how I exist, but if they worship Me
with unalloyed love, then I consider them to be the best of devotees.
34-41. My dear Uddhava, one can give up false pride and prestige by engaging in the following devotional
activities. One may purify oneself by seeing, touching, worshiping, serving, and offering prayers of
glorification and obeisances to My form as the Deity and to My pure devotees. One should also glorify My
transcendental qualities and activities, hear with love and faith the narrations of My glories and constantly
meditate on Me. One should offer to Me whatever one acquires, and accepting oneself as My eternal
servant, one should give oneself completely to Me. One should always discuss My birth and activities and
enjoy life by participating in festivals, such as Janmastami, which glorify My pastimes. In My temple, one
should also participate in festivals and ceremonies by singing, dancing, playing musical instruments and
discussing Me with other Vaisnavas. One should observe all the regularly celebrated annual festivals by
attending ceremonies, pilgrimages and making offerings. One should also observe religious vows such as
Ekadasi and take initiation by the procedures mentioned in the Vedas, Pancaratra and other, similar
literatures. One should faithfully and lovingly support the installation of My Deity, and individually or in
cooperation with others one should work for the construction of Krsna conscious temples and cities as well
as flower gardens, fruit gardens and special areas to celebrate My pastimes. One should consider oneself to
be My humble servant, without duplicity, and thus should help to clean the temple, which is My home. First
one should sweep and dust thoroughly, and then one should further cleanse with water and cow dung.
Having dried the temple, one should sprinkle scented water and decorate the temple with mandalas. One
should thus act just like My servant. A devotee should never advertise his devotional activities; therefore his
service will not be the cause of false pride. One should never use lamps that are offered to Me for other
purposes simply because there is need of illumination, and similarly, one should never offer to Me anything
that has been offered to or used by others. Whatever is most desired by one within this material world, and
whatever is most dear to oneself—one should offer that very thing to Me. Such an offering qualifies one for
eternal life.
42. O saintly Uddhava, please know that you may worship Me in the sun, fire, brahmanas, cows, Vaisnavas,
sky, wind, water, earth, individual soul and all living entities.
43-45. My dear Uddhava, one should worship Me within the sun by chanting selected Vedic mantras and by
performing worship and offering obeisances. One may worship Me within fire by offering oblations of ghee,
and one may worship Me among the brahmanas by respectfully receiving them as guests, even when
uninvited. I can be worshiped within the cows by offerings of grass and other suitable grains and
paraphernalia for the pleasure and health of the cows, and one may worship Me within the Vaisvavas by
offering loving friendship to them and honoring them in all respects. Through steady meditation I am
worshiped within the inner space of the heart, and within the air I can be worshiped by knowledge that
prana, the life air, is the chief among elements. I am worshiped within water by offerings of water itself,
along with other elements such as flowers and tulasi leaves, and one may worship Me within the earth by
proper application of confidential seed mantras. One may worship Me within the individual living entity by
offering food and other enjoyable substances, and one may worship Me within all living entities by seeing
the Supersoul within all of them, thus maintaining equal vision.
46. Thus, in the previously mentioned places of worship and according to the processes I have described,
one should meditate on My peaceful, transcendental form with four arms holding a conchshell, Sudarsana
disc, club and lotus flower. In this way, one should worship Me with fixed attention.
47. One who has executed sacrificial performances and pious works for My satisfaction, and who thus
worships Me with fixed attention, obtains unflinching devotional service unto Me. By the excellent quality
of his service such a worshiper obtains realized knowledge of Me.
48. My dear Uddhava, I am personally the ultimate shelter and way of life for saintly liberated persons, and
thus if one does not engage in My loving devotional service, which is made possible by associating with My
devotees, then for all practical purposes, one possesses no effective means for escaping from material
existence.
49. My dear Uddhava, O beloved of the Yadu dynasty, because you are My servant, well-wisher and friend,
I shall now speak to you the most confidential knowledge. Please hear as I explain these great mysteries to
you.
Chapter Twelve Beyond Renunciation and Knowledge
1-2. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, by associating with My pure devotees
one can destroy one’s attachment for all objects of material sense gratification. Such purifying association
brings Me under the control of My devotee. One may perform the astanga-yoga system, engage in
philosophical analysis of the elements of material nature, practice nonviolence and other ordinary principles
of piety, chant the Vedas, perform penances, take to the renounced order of life, execute sacrificial
performances and dig wells, plant trees and perform other public welfare activities, give in charity, carry out
severe vows, worship the demigods, chant confidential mantras, visit holy places or accept major and minor
disciplinary injunctions, but even by performing such activities one does not bring Me under his control.
3-6. In every yuga many living entities entangled in the modes of passion and ignorance gained the
association of My devotees. Thus, such living entities as the Daityas, Raksasas, birds, beasts, Gandharvas,
Apsaras, Nagas, Siddhas, Caranas, Guhyakas and Vidyadharas, as well as such lower-class human beings as
the vaisyas, sudras, women and others, were able to achieve My supreme abode. Vrtrasura, Prahlada
Maharaja and others like them also achieved My abode by association with My devotees, as did
personalities such as Vrsaparva, Bali Maharaja, Banasura, Maya, Vibhisana, Sugriva, Hanuman, Jambavan,
Gajendra, Jatayu, Tuladhara, Dharma-vyadha, Kubja, the gopis in Vrndavana and the wives of the
brahmanas who were performing sacrifice.
7. The persons I have mentioned did not undergo serious studies of the Vedic literature, nor did they
worship great saintly persons, nor did they execute severe vows or austerities. Simply by association with
Me and My devotees, they achieved Me.
8. The inhabitants of Vrndavana, including the gopis, cows, unmoving creatures such as the twin arjuna
trees, animals, living entities with stunted consciousness such as bushes and thickets, and snakes such as
Kaliya, all achieved the perfection of life by unalloyed love for Me and thus very easily achieved Me.
9. Even though one engages with great endeavor in the mystic yoga system, philosophical speculation,
charity, vows, penances, ritualistic sacrifices, teaching of Vedic mantras to others, personal study of the
Vedas, or the renounced order of life, still one cannot achieve Me.
10. The residents of Vrndavana, headed by the gopis, were always completely attached to Me with deepest
love. Therefore, when My uncle Akrura brought My brother Balarama and Me to the city of Mathura, the
residents of Vrndavana suffered extreme mental distress because of separation from Me and could not find
any other source of happiness.
11. Dear Uddhava, all of those nights that the gopis spent with Me, their most dearly beloved, in the land of
Vrndavana seemed to them to pass in less than a moment. Bereft of My association, however, the gopis felt
that those same nights dragged on forever, as if each night were equal to a day of Brahma.
12. My dear Uddhava, just as great sages in yoga trance merge into self-realization, like rivers merging into
the ocean, and are thus not aware of material names and forms, similarly, the gopis of Vrndavana were so
completely attached to Me within their minds that they could not think of their own bodies, or of this world,
or of their future lives. Their entire consciousness was simply bound up in Me.
13. All those hundreds of thousands of gopis, understanding Me to be their most charming lover and
ardently desiring Me in that way, were unaware of My actual position. Yet by intimately associating with
Me, the gopis attained Me, the Supreme Absolute Truth.
14-15. Therefore, My dear Uddhava, abandon the Vedic mantras as well as the procedures of supplementary
Vedic literatures and their positive and negative injunctions. Disregard that which has been heard and that
which is to be heard. Simply take shelter of Me alone, for I am the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
situated within the heart of all conditioned souls. Take shelter of Me wholeheartedly, and by My grace be
free from fear in all circumstances.
16. Sri Uddhava said: O Lord of all masters of mystic power, I have heard Your words, but the doubt in my
heart does not go away; thus my mind is bewildered.
17. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, the Supreme Lord gives life to every
living being and is situated within the heart along with the life air and primal sound vibration. The Lord can
be perceived in His subtle form within the heart by one’s mind, since the Lord controls the minds of
everyone, even great demigods like Lord Siva. The Supreme Lord also assumes a gross form as the various
sounds of the Vedas, composed of short and long vowels and consonants of different intonations.
18. When sticks of kindling wood are vigorously rubbed together, heat is produced by contact with air, and a
spark of fire appears. Once the fire is kindled, ghee is added and the fire blazes. Similarly, I become
manifest in the sound vibration of the Vedas.
19. The functions of the working senses—the organ of speech, the hands, the legs, the genital and the
anus—and the functions of the knowledge-acquiring senses—the nose, tongue, eyes, skin and ears—along
with the functions of the subtle senses of mind, intelligence, consciousness and false ego, as well as the
function of the subtle pradhana and the interaction of the three modes of material nature—all these should
be understood as My materially manifest form.
20. When many seeds are placed in an agricultural field, innumerable manifestations of trees, bushes,
vegetables and so on will arise from a single source, the soil. Similarly, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who gives life to all and is eternal, originally exists beyond the scope of the cosmic manifestation.
In the course of time, however, the Lord, who is the resting place of the three modes of nature and the
source of the universal lotus flower, in which the cosmic manifestation takes place, divides His material
potencies and thus appears to be manifest in innumerable forms, although He is one.
21. Just as woven cloth rests on the expansion of lengthwise and crosswise threads, similarly the entire
universe is expanded on the lengthwise and crosswise potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
is situated within Him. The conditioned soul has been accepting material bodies since time immemorial, and
these bodies are like great trees sustaining one’s material existence. Just as a tree first blossoms and then
produces fruit, similarly the tree of material existence, one’s material body, produces the various results of
material existence.
22-23. This tree of material existence has two seeds, hundreds of roots, three lower trunks and five upper
trunks. It produces five flavors and has eleven branches and a nest made by two birds. The tree is covered
by three types of bark, gives two fruits and extends up to the sun. Those lusty after material enjoyment and
dedicated to family life enjoy one of the tree’s fruits, and swanlike men in the renounced order of life enjoy
the other fruit. One who with the help of the bonafide spiritual masters can understand this tree to be a
manifestation of the potency of the one Supreme Truth appearing in many forms actually knows the
meaning of the Vedic literature.
24. With steady intelligence you should develop unalloyed devotional service by careful worship of the
spiritual master, and with the sharpened ax of transcendental knowledge you should cut off the subtle
material covering of the soul. Upon realizing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, you should then give up
that ax of analytic knowledge