The Yadu Dynasty Retires to Prabhasa
1. Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: Lord Brahma then set off for Dvaraka, accompanied by his own sons as well
as by the demigods and the great Prajapatis. Lord Siva, the bestower of auspiciousness to all living beings,
also went, surrounded by many ghostly creatures.
2-4. The powerful Lord Indra, along with the Maruts, Adityas, Vasus, Asvinis, Rbhus, Angiras, Rudras,
Visvedevas, Sadhyas, Gandharvas, Apsaras, Nagas, Siddhas, Caranas, Guhyakas, the great sages and
forefathers and the Vidyadharas and Kinnaras, arrived at the city of Dvaraka, hoping to see Lord Krsna. By
His transcendental form, Krsna, the Supreme Lord, enchanted all human beings and spread His own fame
throughout the worlds. The Lord’s glories destroy all contamination within the universe.
5. In that resplendent city of Dvaraka, rich with all superior opulences, the demigods beheld with unsatiated
eyes the wonderful form of Sri Krsna.
6. The demigods covered the Supreme Lord of the universe with flower garlands brought from the gardens
of heaven. Then they praised Him, the best of the Yadu dynasty, with statements containing charming words
and ideas.
7. The demigods began to speak: Our dear Lord, advanced mystie yogis, striving for liberation from the
severe bondage of material work, meditate with great devotion upon Your lotus feet within their hearts.
Dedicating our intelligence, senses, vital air, mind and power of speech to Your Lordship, we demigods
bow down at Your lotus feet.
8. O unconquerable Lord, You engage Your illusory energy, composed of three modes, to unleash, maintain
and devastate the inconceivable manifest cosmos, all within Your own self. As the supreme superintendent
of maya, You appear to be situated in the interaction of the modes of nature; however, You are never
affected by material activities. In fact, You are directly engaged in Your own eternal, spiritual bliss, and thus
You cannot be accused of any material infection.
9. O greatest of all, those whose consciousness is polluted by illusion cannot purify themselves merely by
ordinary worship, study of the Vedas, charity, austerity and ritual activities. Our Lord, those pure souls who
have developed a powerful transcendental faith in Your glories achieve a purified state of existence that can
never be attained by those lacking such faith.
10. Great sages, desiring the highest benefit in life, always cherish Your lotus feet within their hearts, which
are melted by love for You. Similarly, Your self-controlled devotees, desiring to cross beyond the material
kingdom of heaven to achieve opulence equal to Yours, worship Your lotus feet in the morning, at noon and
in the evening. Thus, they meditate upon Your Lordship in Your quadruple expansion. Your lotus feet are
just like a blazing fire that burns to ashes all the inauspicious desires for material sense gratification.
11. Those about to offer oblations into the fire of sacrifice in accordance with the Rg, Yajur and Sama
Vedas meditate on Your lotus feet. Similarly, the practitioners of transcendental yoga meditate upon Your
lotus feet, hoping for knowledge about Your divine mystic potency, and the most elevated pure devotees
perfectly worship Your lotus feet, desiring to cross beyond Your illusory potency.
12. O almighty Lord, You are so kind to Your servants that You have accepted the withered flower garland
that we have placed on Your chest. Since the goddess of fortune makes her abode on Your transcendental
chest, she will undoubtedly become agitated, like a jealous co-wife, upon seeing our offering also dwelling
there. Yet You are so merciful that You neglect Your eternal consort Laksmi and accept our offering as
most excellent worship. O merciful Lord, may Your lotus feet always act as a blazing fire to consume the
inauspicious desires within our hearts.
13. O omnipotent Lord, in Your incarnation as Trivikrama, You raised Your leg like a flagpole to break the
shell of the universe, allowing the holy Ganges to flow down, like a banner of victory, in three branches
throughout the three planetary systems. By three mighty steps of Your lotus feet, Your Lordship captured
Bali Maharaja, along with his universal kingdom. Your lotus feet inspire fear in the demons by driving them
down to hell and fearlessness among Your devotees by elevating them to the perfection of heavenly life. We
are sincerely trying to worship You, our Lord; therefore may Your lotus feet kindly free us from all of our
sinful reactions.
14. You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the transcendental entity who is superior to both material
nature and the enjoyer of nature. May Your lotus feet bestow transcendental pleasure upon us. All of the
great demigods, beginning with Brahma, are embodied living entities. Struggling painfully with one another
under the strict control of Your time factor, they are just like bulls dragged by ropes tied through their
pierced noses.
15. You are the cause of the creation, maintenance and destruction of this universe. As time, You regulate
the subtle and manifest states of material nature and control every living being. As the threefold wheel of
time You diminish all things by Your imperceptible actions, and thus You are the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
16. My dear Lord, the original purusa-avatara, Maha-Visnu, acquires His creative potency from You. Thus
with infallible energy He impregnates material nature, producing the mahat-tattva. Then the mahat-tattva,
the amalgamated material energy, endowed with the potency of the Lord, produces from itself the primeval
golden egg of the universe, which is covered by various layers of material elements.
17. O Lord, You are the supreme creator of this universe and the ultimate controller of all moving and
nonmoving living entities. You are Hrsikesa, the supreme controller of all sensory activity, and thus You
never become contaminated or entangled in the course of Your supervision of the infinite sensory activities
within the material creation. On the other hand, other living entities, even yogis and philosophers, are
disturbed and frightened simply by remembering the material objects that they have supposedly renounced
in their pursuit of enlightenment.
18. My Lord, You are living with sixteen thousand exquisitely beautiful, aristocratic wives. By their
irresistible coy and smiling glances and by their lovely arching eyebrows, they send You messages of eager
conjugal love. But they are completely unable to disturb the mind and senses of Your Lordship.
19. The nectar-bearing rivers of discussions about You, and also the holy rivers generated from the bathing
of Your lotus feet, are able to destroy all contamination within the three worlds. Those who are striving for
purification associate with the holy narrations of Your glories by hearing them with their ears, and they
associate with the holy rivers flowing from Your lotus feet by physically bathing in them.
20. Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: After Brahma, along with Lord Siva and the other demigods, thus
offered prayers to the Supreme Lord, Govinda, Lord Brahma situated himself in the sky and addressed the
Lord as follows.
21. Lord Brahma said: My dear Lord, previously we requested You to remove the burden of the earth. O
unlimited Personality of Godhead, that request has certainly been fulfilled.
22. My Lord, You have reestablished the principles of religion among pious men who are always firmly
bound to the truth. You have also distributed Your glories all over the world, and thus the whole world can
be purified by hearing about You.
23. Descending into the dynasty of King Yadu, You have manifested Your unique transcendental form, and
for the benefit of the entire universe You have executed magnanimous transcendental activities.
24. My dear Lord, those pious and saintly persons who in the age of Kali hear about Your transcendental
activities and also glorify them will easily cross over the darkness of the age.
25. O Supreme Personality of Godhead, O my Lord, You have descended into the Yadu dynasty, and thus
You have spent one hundred twenty-five autumns with Your devotees.
26-27. My dear Lord, there is nothing remaining at this time for Your Lordship to do on behalf of the
demigods. You have already withdrawn Your dynasty by the curse of the brahmanas. O Lord, You are the
basis of everything, and if You so desire, kindly return now to Your own abode in the spiritual world. At the
same time, we humbly beg that You always protect us. We are Your humble servants, and on Your behalf
we are managing the universal situation. We, along with our planets and followers, require Your constant
protection.
28. The Supreme Lord said: O lord of the demigods, Brahma, I understand your prayers and request. Having
removed the burden of the earth, I have executed everything that was required on your behalf.
29. That very Yadava dynasty in which I appeared became greatly magnified in opulence, especially in their
physical strength and courage, to the extent that they threatened to devour the whole world. Therefore I have
stopped them, just as the shore holds back the great ocean.
30. If I were to leave this world without withdrawing the overly proud members of the Yadu dynasty, the
whole world would be destroyed by the deluge of their unlimited expansion.
31. Now due to the brahmana’s curse, the annihilation of My family has already begun. O sinless Brahma,
when this annihilation is finished and I am enroute to Vaikuntha, I will pay a small visit to your abode.
32. Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: Thus addressed by the Lord of the universe, the self-born Brahma fell down
in obeisances at the lotus feet of the Lord. Surrounded by all the demigods, the great Brahma then returned
to his personal abode.
33. Thereafter, the Personality of Godhead observed that tremendous disturbances were taking place in the
holy city of Dvaraka. Thus the Lord spoke to the assembled senior members of the Yadu dynasty as follows.
34. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Our dynasty has been cursed by the brahmanas. Such a curse
is impossible to counteract, and thus great disturbances are appearing everywhere around us.
35. My dear respected elders, we must not remain any longer in this place if we wish to keep our lives intact.
Let us go this very day to the most pious place Prabhasa. We have no time to delay.
36. Once, the moon was afflicted with consumption because of the curse of Daksa, but just by taking bath at
Prabhasa-ksetra, the moon was immediately freed from his sinful reaction and again resumed the waxing of
his phases.
37-38. By bathing at Prabhasa-ksetra, by offering sacrifice there to placate the forefathers and demigods, by
feeding the worshipable brahmanas with various delicious foodstuffs and by bestowing opulent gifts upon
them as the most suitable candidates for charity, we will certainly cross over these terrible dangers through
such acts of charity, just as one can cross over a great ocean in a suitable boat.
39. Sukadeva Gosvami said: O favorite son of the Kurus, thus advised by the Personality of Godhead, the
Yadavas made up their minds to go to that holy place, Prabhasa-ksetra, and thus yoked their horses to their
chariots.

"The Uddhava-Gita" starts
40-41. My dear King, Uddhava was a constantly faithful follower of Lord Krsna. Upon seeing the imminent
departure of the Yadavas, hearing from them of the Lord’s instructions and taking note of the fearful omens,
he approached the Personality of Godhead in a private place. He bowed down with his head at the lotus feet
of the supreme controller of the universe and with folded hands addressed Him as follows.
42. Sri Uddhava said: O my Lord, O supreme God among all the demigods, real piety is invoked simply by
hearing and chanting Your transcendental glories. My Lord, it appears that You will now withdraw Your
dynasty, and thus You Yourself will finally give up Your pastimes within this universe. You are the
supreme controller and the master of all mystic power. But although You are fully capable of counteracting
the brahmanas’ curse against Your dynasty, You are not doing so, and Your disappearance is imminent.
43. O Lord Kesava, my dear master, I cannot tolerate giving up Your lotus feet even for a fraction of a
moment. I urge You to take me along with You to Your own abode.
44. O my dear Krsna, Your pastimes are supremely auspicious for mankind and are an intoxicating beverage
for the ears. Tasting such pastimes, people forget their desires for other things.
45. My dear Lord, You are the Supreme Soul, and thus You are most dear to us. We are Your devotees, and
how can we possibly reject You or live without You even for a moment? Whether we are lying down,
sitting, walking, standing, bathing, enjoying recreation, eating or doing anything else, we are constantly
engaged in Your service.
46. Simply by decorating ourselves with the garlands, fragrant oils, clothes and ornaments that You have
already enjoyed, and by eating the remnants of Your meals, we, Your servants, will indeed conquer Your
illusory energy.
47. Naked sages who seriously endeavor in spiritual practice, who have raised their semen upward, who are
peaceful and sinless members of the renounced order, attain the spiritual abode called Brahman.
48-49. O greatest of mystics, although we are conditioned souls wandering on the path of fruitive work, we
will certainly cross beyond the darkness of this material world simply by hearing about Your Lordship in the
association of Your devotees. Thus we are always remembering and glorifying the wonderful things You do
and the wonderful things You say. We ecstatically recall Your amorous pastimes with Your confidential
conjugal devotees and how You boldly smile and move about while engaged in such youthful pastimes. My
dear Lord, Your loving pastimes are bewilderingly similar to the activities of ordinary people within this
material world.
50. Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King Pariksit, thus addressed, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna,
the son of Devaki, began to reply confidentially to His dear, unalloyed servant Uddhava.
Chapter Seven Lord Krsna Instructs Uddhava
1. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O greatly fortunate Uddhava, you have accurately revealed
My desire to withdraw the Yadu dynasty from the earth and return to My own abode in Vaikuntha. Thus
Lord Brahma, Lord Siva and all other planetary rulers are now praying for Me to resume My residence in
Vaikuntha.
2. Answering the prayer of Lord Brahma, I descended within this world along with My plenary portion,
Lord Baladeva, and performed various activities on behalf of the demigods. I have now completed My
mission here.
3. Now due to the brahmanas’ curse the Yadu dynasty will certainly perish by fighting among themselves;
and on the seventh day from today the ocean will rise up and inundate this city of Dvaraka.
4. O saintly Uddhava, in the near future I will abandon this earth. Then, being overwhelmed by the age of
Kali, the earth will be bereft of all piety.
5. My dear Uddhava, you should not remain here on the earth once I have abandoned this world. My dear
devotee, you are sinless, but in Kali-yuga the people will be addicted to all types of sinful activities;
therefore do not stay here.
6. Now you should completely give up all attachment to your personal friends and relatives and fix your
mind on Me. Thus being always conscious of Me, you should observe all things with equal vision and
wander throughout the earth.
7. My dear Uddhava, the material universe that you perceive through your mind, speech, eyes, ears and
other senses is an illusory creation that one imagines to be real due to the influence of maya. In fact, you
should know that all of the objects of the material senses are temporary.
8. One whose consciousness is bewildered by illusion perceives many differences in value and meaning
among material objects. Thus one engages constantly on the platform of material good and evil and is bound
by such conceptions. Absorbed in material duality, such a person contemplates the performance of
compulsory duties, nonperformance of such duties and performance of forbidden activities.
9. Therefore, bringing all your senses under control and thus subduing the mind, you should see the entire
world as situated within the self, who is expanded everywhere, and you should also see this individual self
within Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
10. Being fully endowed with conclusive knowledge of the Vedas and having realized the ultimate purpose
of such knowledge in practice, you will be able to perceive the pure self, and thus your mind will be
satisfied. At that time you will become dear to all living beings, headed by the demigods, and you will never
be hampered by any disturbance in life.
11. One who has transcended material good and evil automatically acts in accordance with religious
injunctions and avoids forbidden activities. The self-realized person does this spontaneously, like an
innocent child, and not because he is thinking in terms of material good and evil.
12. One who is the kind well-wisher of all living beings, who is peaceful and firmly fixed in knowledge and
realization, sees Me within all things. Such a person never again falls down into the cycle of birth and death.
13. Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Krsna, thus instructed
His pure devotee Uddhava, who was eager to receive knowledge from the Lord. Uddhava then offered
obeisances to the Lord and spoke as follows.
14. Sri Uddhava said: My dear Lord, You alone award the results of yoga practice, and You are so kind that
by Your own influence You distribute the perfection of yoga to Your devotee. Thus You are the Supreme
Soul who is realized through yoga, and it is You who are the origin of all mystic power. For my supreme
benefit You have explained the procedure for giving up the material world through the process of sannyasa,
or renunciation.
15. My dear Lord, O Supreme Soul, for those whose minds are attached to sense gratification, and especially
for those bereft of devotion unto You, such renunciation of material enjoyment is most difficult to perform.
That is my opinion.
16. O my Lord, I myself am most foolish because my consciousness is merged in the material body and
bodily relations, which are all manufactured by Your illusory energy. Thus I am thinking, “I am this body,
and all of these relatives are mine.” Therefore, my Lord, please instruct Your poor servant. Please tell me
how I can very easily carry out Your instructions.
17. My dear Lord, You are the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and You reveal
Yourself to Your devotees. Besides Your Lordship, I do not see anyone who can actually explain perfect
knowledge to me. Such a perfect teacher is not to be found even among the demigods in heaven. Indeed, all
of the demigods, headed by Lord Brahma, are bewildered by Your illusory potency. They are conditioned
souls who accept their own material bodies and bodily expansions to be the highest truth.
18. Therefore, O Lord, feeling weary of material life and tormented by its distresses, I now surrender unto
You because You are the perfect master. You are the unlimited, all-knowing Supreme Personality of
Godhead, whose spiritual abode in Vaikuntha is free from all disturbances. In fact, You are known as
Narayana, the true friend of all living beings.
19. The Supreme Lord replied: Generally those human beings who can expertly analyze the actual situation
of the material world are able to raise themselves beyond the inauspicious life of gross material gratification.
20. An intelligent person, expert in perceiving the world around him and in applying sound logic, can
achieve real benefit through his own intelligence. Thus sometimes one acts as one’s own instructing
spiritual master.
21. In the human form of life, those who are self-controlled and expert in the spiritual science of Sankhya
can directly see Me along with all of My potencies.
22. In this world there are many kinds of created bodies—some with one leg, others with two, three, four or
more legs, and still others with no legs—but of all these, the human form is actually dear to Me.
23. Although I, the Supreme Lord, can never be captured by ordinary sense perception, those situated in
human life may use their intelligence and other faculties of perception to directly search for Me through
both apparent and indirectly ascertained symptoms.
24. In this regard, sages cite a historical narration concerning the conversation between the greatly powerful
King Yadu and an avadhuta.
25. Maharaja Yadu once observed a certain brahmana avadhuta, who appeared to be quite young and
learned, wandering about fearlessly. Being himself most learned in spiritual science, the King took the
opportunity and inquired from him as follows.
26. Sri Yadu said: O brahmana, I see that you are not engaged in any practical religious activity, and yet you
have acquired a most expert understanding of all things and all people within this world. Kindly tell me, sir,
how did you acquire this extraordinary intelligence, and why are you traveling freely throughout the world
behaving as if you were a child?
27. Generally human beings work hard to cultivate religiosity, economic development, sense gratification
and also knowledge of the soul, and their usual motive is to increase the duration of their lives, acquire fame
and enjoy material opulence.
28. You, however, although capable, learned, expert, handsome and most eloquent, are not engaged in doing
anything, nor do you desire anything; rather, you appear stupefied and maddened as if you were a ghostly
creature.
29. Although all people within the material world are burning in the great forest fire of lust and greed, you
remain free and are not burned by that fire. You are just like an elephant who takes shelter from a forest fire
by standing within the water of the Ganges River,
30. O brahmana, we see that you are devoid of any contact with material enjoyment and that you are
traveling alone, without any companions or family members. Therefore, because we are sincerely inquiring
from you, please tell us the cause of the great ecstasy that you are feeling within yourself.
31. Lord Krsna continued: The intelligent King Yadu, always respectful to the brahmanas, waited with
bowed head as the brahmana, pleased with the King’s attitude, began to reply.
32. The brahmana said: My dear King, with my intelligence I have taken shelter of many spiritual masters.
Having gained transcendental understanding from them, I now wander about the earth in a liberated
condition. Please listen as I describe them to you.
33-35. O King, I have taken shelter of twenty-four gurus, who are the following: the earth, air, sky, water,
fire, moon, sun, pigeon and python; the sea, moth, honeybee, elephant and honey thief; the deer, the fish, the
prostitute Pingala, the kurara bird and the child; and the young girl, arrow maker, serpent, spider and wasp.
My dear King, by studying their activities I have learned the science of the self.
36. Please listen, O son of Maharaja Yayati, O tiger among men, as I explain to you what I have learned
from each of these gurus.
37. A sober person, even when harassed by other living beings, should understand that his aggressors are
acting helplessly under the control of God, and thus he should never be distracted from progress on his own
path. This rule I have learned from the earth.
38. A saintly person should learn from the mountain to devote all his efforts to the service of others and to
make the welfare of others the sole reason for his existence. Similarly, as the disciple of the tree, he should
learn to dedicate himself to others.
39. A learned sage should take his satisfaction in the simple maintenance of his existence and should not
seek satisfaction through gratifying the material senses. In other words, one should care for the material
body in such a way that one’s higher knowledge is not destroyed and so that one’s speech and mind are not
deviated from self-realization.
40. Even a transcendentalist is surrounded by innumerable material objects, which possess good and bad
qualities. However, one who has transcended material good and evil should not become entangled even
when in contact with the material objects; rather, he should act like the wind.
41. Although a self-realized soul may live in various material bodies while in this world, experiencing their
various qualities and functions, he is never entangled, just as the wind which carries various aromas does not
actually mix with them.
42. A thoughtful sage, even while living within a material body, should understand himself to be pure spirit
soul. Similarly, one should see that the spirit soul enters within all forms of life, both moving and
nonmoving, and that the individual souls are thus all-pervading. The sage should further observe that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, as the Supersoul, is simultaneously present within all things. Both the
individual soul and the Supersoul can be understood by comparing them to the nature of the sky: although
the sky extends everywhere and everything rests within the sky, the sky does not mix with anything, nor can
it be divided by anything.
43. Although the mighty wind blows clouds and storms across the sky, the sky is never implicated or
affected by these activities. Similarly, the spirit soul is not actually changed or affected by contact with the
material nature. Although the living entity enters within a body made of earth, water and fire, and although
he is impelled by the three modes of nature created by eternal time, his eternal spiritual nature is never
actually affected.
44. O King, a saintly person is just like water because he is free from all contamination, gentle by nature,
and by speaking creates a beautiful vibration like that of flowing water. Just by seeing, touching or hearing
such a saintly person, the living entity is purified, just as one is cleansed by contact with pure water. Thus a
saintly person, just like a holy place, purifies all those who contact him because he always chants the glories
of the Lord45. Saintly persons become powerful by execution of austerities. Their consciousness is unshakable because
they do not try to enjoy anything within the material world. Such naturally liberated sages accept foodstuffs
that are offered to them by destiny, and if by chance they happen to eat contaminated food, they are not
affected, just like fire, which burns up contaminated substances that are offered to it.
46. A saintly person, just like fire, sometimes appears in a concealed form and at other times reveals
himself. For the welfare of the conditioned souls who desire real happiness, a saintly person may accept the
worshipable position of spiritual master, and thus like fire he burns to ashes all the past and future sinful
reactions of his worshipers by mercifully accepting their offerings.
47. Just as fire manifests differently in pieces of wood of different sizes and qualities, the omnipotent
Supreme Soul, having entered the bodies of higher and lower life forms created by His own potency,
appears to assume the identity of each.
48. The various phases of one’s material life, beginning with birth and culminating in death, are all
properties of the body and do not affect the soul, just as the apparent waxing and waning of the moon does
not affect the moon itself. Such changes are enforced by the imperceptible movements of time.
49. The flames of a fire appear and disappear at every moment, and yet this creation and destruction is not
noticed by the ordinary observer. Similarly, the mighty waves of time flow constantly, like the powerful
currents of a river, and imperceptibly cause the birth, growth and death of innumerable material bodies. And
yet the soul, who is thus constantly forced to change his position, cannot perceive the actions of time.
50. Just as the sun evaporates large quantities of water by its potent rays and later returns the water to the
earth in the form of rain, similarly, a saintly person accepts all types of material objects with his material
senses, and at the appropriate time, when the proper person has approached him to request them, he returns
such material objects. Thus, both in accepting and giving up the objects of the senses, he is not entangled.
51. Even when reflected in various objects, the sun is never divided, nor does it merge into its reflection.
Only those with dull brains would consider the sun in this way. Similarly, although the soul is reflected
through different material bodies, the soul remains undivided and nonmaterial.
52. One should never indulge in excessive affection or concern for anyone or anything; otherwise one will
have to experience great suffering, just like the foolish pigeon.
53. There once was a pigeon who lived in the forest along with his wife. He had built a nest within a tree
and lived there for several years in her company.
54. The two pigeons were very much devoted to their household duties. Their hearts being tied together by
sentimental affection, they were each attracted by the other’s glances, bodily features and states of mind.
Thus, they completely bound each other in affection.
55. Naively trusting in the future, they carried out their acts of resting, sitting, walking, standing, conversing,
playing, eating and so forth as a loving couple among the trees of the forest.
56. Whenever she desired anything, O King, the she-pigeon would flatteringly cajole her husband, and he in
turn would gratify her by faithfully doing whatever she wanted, even with great personal difficulty. Thus, he
could not control his senses in her association.
57. Then the female pigeon experienced her first pregnancy. When the time arrived, the chaste lady
delivered a number of eggs within the nest in the presence of her husband.
58. When the time was ripe, baby pigeons, with tender limbs and feathers created by the inconceivable
potencies of the Lord, were born from those eggs.
59. The two pigeons became most affectionate to their children and took great pleasure in listening to their
awkward chirping, which sounded very sweet to the parents. Thus with love they began to raise the little
birds who were born of them.
60. The parent birds became very joyful by observing the soft wings of their children, their chirping, their
lovely innocent movements around the nest and their attempts to jump up and fly. Seeing their children
happy, the parents were also happy.
61. Their hearts bound to each other by affection, the foolish birds, completely bewildered by the illusory
energy of Lord Visnu, continued to take care of the young offspring who had been born to them.
62. One day the two heads of the family went out to find food for the children. Being very anxious to feed
their offspring properly, they wandered all over the forest for a long time.
63. At that time a certain hunter who happened to be wandering through the forest saw the young pigeons
moving about near their nest. Spreading out his net he captured them all.
64. The pigeon and his wife were always anxious for the maintenance of their children, and they were
wandering in the forest for that purpose. Having obtained proper food, they now returned to their nest.
65. When the lady pigeon caught sight of her own children trapped within the hunter’s net, she was
overwhelmed with anguish, and crying out, she rushed toward them as they cried out to her in return.
66. The lady pigeon had always allowed herself to be bound by the ropes of intense material affection, and
thus her mind was overwhelmed by anguish. Being in the grip of the illusory energy of the Lord, she
completely forgot herself, and rushing forward to her helpless children, she was immediately bound in the
hunter’s net.
67. Seeing his own children, who were more dear to him than life itself, fatally bound in the hunter’s net
along with his dearmost wife, whom he considered equal in every way to himself, the poor male pigeon
began to lament wretchedly.
68. The male pigeon said: Alas, just see how I am now destroyed! I am obviously a great fool, for I did not
properly execute pious activities. I could not satisfy myself, nor could I fulfill the purpose of life. My dear
family, which was the basis of my religiosity, economic development and sense gratification, is now
hopelessly ruined.
69. My wife and I were an ideal match. She always faithfully obeyed me and in fact accepted me as her
worshipable deity. But now, seeing her children lost and her home empty, she has left me behind and gone
to heaven with our saintly children.
70. Now I am a wretched person living in an empty home. My wife is dead; my children are dead. Why
should I possibly want to live? My heart is so pained by separation from my family that life itself has
become simply suffering.
71. As the father pigeon wretchedly stared at his poor children trapped in the net and on the verge of death,
pathetically struggling to free themselves, his mind went blank, and thus he himself fell into the hunter’s net.
72. The cruel hunter, having fulfilled his desire by capturing the head pigeon, his wife and all of their
children, set off for his own home.
73. In this way, one who is too attached to family life becomes disturbed at heart. Like the pigeon, he tries to
find pleasure in mundane sex attraction. Busily engaged in maintaining his own family, the miserly person
is fated to suffer greatly, along with all his family members.
74. The doors of liberation are opened wide to one who has achieved human life. But if a human being
simply devotes himself to family life like the foolish bird in this story, then he is to be considered as one
who has climbed to a high place
only to trip and fall down.
